README.md, before:

# `dlutils`

`dlutils` is a Nim package for easy shared library loading.

See package [documentation](https://amnr.github.io/dlutils/).

## Installing

```sh
$ nimble install dlutils
```

## Usage

```nim
dlgencalls "somelib", paths:
  # proc and var definitions
```

`dlgencalls` creates three procs: `proc open_somelib_library(): bool`,
`proc close_somelib_library()` and `proc last_somelib_error()`.

### Open proc

The open proc tries to load shared library defined in paths and loads
all symbols defined in body. Paths may be either single string or an array
of strings. Subsequent calls are ignored.

The open proc returns `true` on success or `false` on error (no library
found, one of symbols not found).

Procs and variables marked with `unchecked`_ pragma do not cause
open function to faile and are set to `nil`.

Allowed definitions in body:
- proc: `proc (a: cint): cint`
- var: `var a: cint`
- `where` statement

Not allowed in body:
- export marker `*` in variable; all functions and variables are exported
  by default
- multiple variables in single `var` statement; use single `var` statement
  per variable

Allowed `proc` pragmas:
- `{.importc: "source_name".}` - used when original name is invalid in Nim
                                 or you want to change it
- `{.unchecked.}` - used when definiton is optional - the proc pointer
                    is set to `nil` if no such proc is found in library
- `{.varargs.}` - used when proc takes varargs

Allowed `var` pragmas:
- `{.importc: "source_name".}` - used when original name is invalid in Nim
                                 or you want to change it
- `{.unchecked.}` - used when defintion is optional

All other proc/var pragmas are ignored.

> **_Warning:_**
  Do not add `ptr` to variable type, it's done automatically (variable
  of type `cint` becomes `ptr cint`).

### Close proc

The close proc unloads the shared library. All symbols loaded are set
to `nil`. Subsequent calls are ignored.

### Error proc

The error proc returns a human-readable string describing the most recent
error that occured from a call to `open_name_library()` or empty string on
no error.

The returned string does not include a trailing newline.

## Example

Source:

```nim
import dlutils

# Create open_math_library, close_math_library, last_math_error
# and proc/var symbols defined in body.

dlgencalls "math", ["libm.so", "libm.so.6"]:
  # Required proc. open_math_library returns false if not found.
  proc cbrt (x: cdouble): cdouble

  # Optional proc. open_math_library sets sqrt to nil if not found.
  proc sqrt (x: cdouble): cdouble {.unchecked.}

  # Function "sqrtf" imported as "sqrt2".
  proc sqrt2 (x: cfloat): cfloat {.importc: "sqrtf".}

  # Required var of type ptr cint.
  var reqvar: cint

  # Optional var of type ptr clong.
  var optvar {.unchecked.}: clong
```

Generated Code:

```nim
var math_handle: LibHandle = nil

var cbrt*: proc (x, y: cdouble): cdouble {.cdecl, gcsafe, raises: [].} = nil
var sqrt*: proc (x, y: cdouble): cdouble {.cdecl, gcsafe, raises: [].} = nil
var sqrt2*: proc (x, y: cfloat): cfloat {.cdecl, gcsafe, raises: [].} = nil
var reqvar*: ptr cint = nil
var optvar*: ptr clong = nil

proc open_math_library*(): bool =
  result =
    ##  Open library.
    if math_handle == nil:
      math_handle = loadLib "libm.so"
      if math_handle == nil:
        return false
      cbrt = cast[cbrt.type](symAddr(math_handle, "cbrt"))
      if cbrt == nil:
        return false
      sqrt = cast[sqrt.type](symAddr(math_handle, "sqrt"))
      sqrt2 = cast[sqrt2.type](symAddr(math_handle, "sqrtf"))
      if sqrt2 == nil:
        return false
      reqvar = cast[reqvar.type](symAddr(math_handle, "reqvar"))
      if reqvar == nil:
        return false
      optvar = cast[optvar.type](symAddr(math_handle, "optvar"))
    true

proc close_math_library*() =
  ##  Close library.
  if math_handle != nil:
    cbrt = nil
    sqrt = nil
    sqrt2 = nil
    reqvar = nil
    optvar = nil
    math_handle.unloadLib
    math_handle = nil

proc last_math_error*(): string =
  ##  Returns the most recent error that occured from a call to open proc.
  #[
    code follows…
  ]#
```

## Sample Code

```Nim
import dlutils

# This dlgencalls will create two functions:
# - proc open_math_library(): bool
# - close_math_library()
dlgencalls "math", ["libm.so", "libm.so.6"]:
  # Required proc - open_math_library will fail (return false)
  # if not found.
  proc cbrt (x: cdouble): cdouble

  # Optional proc - sqrt will be nil if not found.
  proc sqrt (x: cdouble): cdouble {.unchecked.}

  # Required global variable (ptr cint) - open_math_library
  # will fail if not found.
  var reqvar: cint

  # Optional global variable (ptr clong) - optval will be set
  # to nil if not found.
  var optvar {.unchecked.}: clong

proc main() =
  if not open_math_library():
    echo "Failed to open library"
    quit QuitFailure

  defer:
    close_math_library()

  echo "cbrt(2.0) = ", cbrt 2.0

  if sqrt != nil:
    echo "sqrt(2.0) = ", sqrt 2.0

  echo "reqvar: ", reqvar[]

  if optval != nil:
    echo "optvar: ", optvar[]

when isMainModule:
  main()
```

## License

`dlutils` is released under (either or both):

- [**MIT**](LICENSE-MIT.txt) &mdash; Nim license
- [**NCSA**](LICENSE-NCSA.txt) &mdash; author's license of choice

[//]: # (vim: set sts=4 et sw=4)

Commit message:

Increased error verbosity on Windows. Added logging.

README.md, after:

# `dlutils`

`dlutils` is a Nim package for easy shared library loading.

See package [documentation](https://amnr.github.io/dlutils/).

## Installing

```sh
$ nimble install dlutils
```

## Configuration

Set `-d=uselogging` to turn logging on (via `std/logging`).

## Usage

```nim
dlgencalls "somelib", paths:
  # proc and var definitions
```

`dlgencalls` creates three procs: `proc open_somelib_library(): bool`,
`proc close_somelib_library()` and `proc last_somelib_error()`.

### Open proc

The open proc tries to load shared library defined in paths and loads
all symbols defined in body. Paths may be either single string or an array
of strings. Subsequent calls are ignored.

The open proc returns `true` on success or `false` on error (no library
found, one of symbols not found).

Procs and variables marked with `unchecked`_ pragma do not cause
open function to faile and are set to `nil`.

Allowed definitions in body:
- proc: `proc (a: cint): cint`
- var: `var a: cint`
- `where` statement

Not allowed in body:
- export marker `*` in variable; all functions and variables are exported
  by default
- multiple variables in single `var` statement; use single `var` statement
  per variable

Allowed `proc` pragmas:
- `{.importc: "source_name".}` - used when original name is invalid in Nim
                                 or you want to change it
- `{.unchecked.}` - used when definiton is optional - the proc pointer
                    is set to `nil` if no such proc is found in library
- `{.varargs.}` - used when proc takes varargs

Allowed `var` pragmas:
- `{.importc: "source_name".}` - used when original name is invalid in Nim
                                 or you want to change it
- `{.unchecked.}` - used when defintion is optional

All other proc/var pragmas are ignored.

> **_Warning:_**
  Do not add `ptr` to variable type, it's done automatically (variable
  of type `cint` becomes `ptr cint`).

### Close proc

The close proc unloads the shared library. All symbols loaded are set
to `nil`. Subsequent calls are ignored.

### Error proc

The error proc returns a human-readable string describing the most recent
error that occured from a call to `open_name_library()` or empty string on
no error.

The returned string does not include a trailing newline.

## Example

Source:

```nim
import dlutils

# Create open_math_library, close_math_library, last_math_error
# and proc/var symbols defined in body.

dlgencalls "math", ["libm.so", "libm.so.6"]:
  # Required proc. open_math_library returns false if not found.
  proc cbrt (x: cdouble): cdouble

  # Optional proc. open_math_library sets sqrt to nil if not found.
  proc sqrt (x: cdouble): cdouble {.unchecked.}

  # Function "sqrtf" imported as "sqrt2".
  proc sqrt2 (x: cfloat): cfloat {.importc: "sqrtf".}

  # Required var of type ptr cint.
  var reqvar: cint

  # Optional var of type ptr clong.
  var optvar {.unchecked.}: clong
```

Generated Code:

```nim
var math_handle: LibHandle = nil

var cbrt*: proc (x, y: cdouble): cdouble {.cdecl, gcsafe, raises: [].} = nil
var sqrt*: proc (x, y: cdouble): cdouble {.cdecl, gcsafe, raises: [].} = nil
var sqrt2*: proc (x, y: cfloat): cfloat {.cdecl, gcsafe, raises: [].} = nil
var reqvar*: ptr cint = nil
var optvar*: ptr clong = nil

proc open_math_library*(): bool =
  result =
    ##  Open library.
    if math_handle == nil:
      math_handle = loadLib "libm.so"
      if math_handle == nil:
        return false
      cbrt = cast[cbrt.type](symAddr(math_handle, "cbrt"))
      if cbrt == nil:
        return false
      sqrt = cast[sqrt.type](symAddr(math_handle, "sqrt"))
      sqrt2 = cast[sqrt2.type](symAddr(math_handle, "sqrtf"))
      if sqrt2 == nil:
        return false
      reqvar = cast[reqvar.type](symAddr(math_handle, "reqvar"))
      if reqvar == nil:
        return false
      optvar = cast[optvar.type](symAddr(math_handle, "optvar"))
    true

proc close_math_library*() =
  ##  Close library.
  if math_handle != nil:
    cbrt = nil
    sqrt = nil
    sqrt2 = nil
    reqvar = nil
    optvar = nil
    math_handle.unloadLib
    math_handle = nil

proc last_math_error*(): string =
  ##  Returns the most recent error that occured from a call to open proc.
  #[
    code follows…
  ]#
```

## Sample Code

```Nim
import dlutils

# This dlgencalls will create two functions:
# - proc open_math_library(): bool
# - close_math_library()
dlgencalls "math", ["libm.so", "libm.so.6"]:
  # Required proc - open_math_library will fail (return false)
  # if not found.
  proc cbrt (x: cdouble): cdouble

  # Optional proc - sqrt will be nil if not found.
  proc sqrt (x: cdouble): cdouble {.unchecked.}

  # Required global variable (ptr cint) - open_math_library
  # will fail if not found.
  var reqvar: cint

  # Optional global variable (ptr clong) - optval will be set
  # to nil if not found.
  var optvar {.unchecked.}: clong

proc main() =
  if not open_math_library():
    echo "Failed to open library"
    quit QuitFailure

  defer:
    close_math_library()

  echo "cbrt(2.0) = ", cbrt 2.0

  if sqrt != nil:
    echo "sqrt(2.0) = ", sqrt 2.0

  echo "reqvar: ", reqvar[]

  if optval != nil:
    echo "optvar: ", optvar[]

when isMainModule:
  main()
```

## License

`dlutils` is released under (either or both):

- [**MIT**](LICENSE-MIT.txt) &mdash; Nim license
- [**NCSA**](LICENSE-NCSA.txt) &mdash; author's license of choice

[//]: # (vim: set sts=4 et sw=4)
